README.md, before:

<h1 align="center">﷽</h1>

# Nmaa – Full-Stack Social Media App

A full-stack Instagram-like application built using **FastAPI**, **MongoDB**, and **Next.js**
Designed with modularity, clarity, and scalability.

This project is currently in the early stages of development.

---

## Table of Contents

- [Features](#features)
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  - [Auth Server](#auth-server)
  - [Resource Server](#resource-server)
  - [Gateway Server](#gateway-server)
  - [Frontend](#frontend)
- [Contributors & Tools](#contributors--tools)
- [Author](#author)

---

## Features

- **Microservices Architecture** – Modular Auth and Resource servers
- **JWT Auth & Refresh Tokens** – Secure authentication and session management
- **Async FastAPI** – Non-blocking I/O and dependency injection
- **Redis Caching** – In-memory performance optimization
- **MongoDB (Motor)** – Async NoSQL document database
- **Next.js (TypeScript)** – Modern frontend with Tailwind, Redux Toolkit, and Shadcn UI
- **Docker Support** – Ready for containerized deployment

---

## Tech Stack

| Layer          | Tech                                                            |
| -------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Backend        | FastAPI, Motor, Redis, Pydantic, bcrypt                         |
| Frontend       | Next.js, TypeScript, TailwindCSS, Redux Toolkit, Shadcn, lucide |
| Infrastructure | Docker, Caddy (reverse proxy), MongoDB                          |
| Testing & Dev  | pytest, VS Code Tasks                                           |

---

## Getting Started

This project has a multi-server architecture, each server has its own folder (auth-server, resource-server and frontend)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/hellmakima/instagram.git
```

### Auth Server

The auth server is responsible for user authentication, password management, and user management
It uses JWT for authentication and refresh tokens for session management

**MongoDB**
Database: instagram_auth
Collections: users, refresh_tokens

```bash
cd instagram/auth-server
uv sync --frozen
uv run uvicorn app.main:app --reload --port 5001
```

### Resource Server

The resource server is responsible for handling all the media files and their metadata

**MongoDB**
Database: instagram_resource
Collections: users

```bash
cd instagram/resource-server
uv sync --frozen
uv run uvicorn app.main:app --reload --port 5002
```

### Gateway Server

This is reverse proxy for handling all the requests from the frontend and redirecting them to the appropriate server

This is just a temporary solution to redirect requests. This will be replaced by `nginx`

You can skip this and configure `instagram/frontend/.env` to proxy requests to the appropriate server along with CORS headers in main.py of respective server

1. Download [caddyserver](https://caddyserver.com/download)
2. copy `instagram/utils/caddy.json` to the same folder
3. run `caddy_windows_amd64.exe run`
4. in a new terminal, run `caddy_windows_amd64.exe  reload --config caddy.json`

You'll also need to set up `hosts` file in `C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc` with the following content:

```
127.0.0.1 nmaa.com
127.0.0.1 auth.nmaa.com
127.0.0.1 resource.nmaa.com
```

### Frontend

The frontend is a Next.js application

```bash
cd instagram/frontend
npm i
npm run dev
```

You're all set!
visit `nmaa.com` in your favorite browser

## Contributors & Tools

- [Supermaven VS Code Extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Supermaven.supermaven) - Massive shoutout to for unlimited free fancy auto-completions
- [Gemini](https://gemini.google.com/app?hl=en-IN) - Great teacher after some tweaking
- [ChatGPT](https://chatgpt.com/?temporary-chat=true) - For any small tasks and questions

---

## Author

Developed by [@hellmakima](https://github.com/hellmakima)

---

Pull requests, suggestions, and collaborations are welcome

Commit message:

[feat](auth-server): rebuilt auth-server with email verification
- Updated dependencies and FastAPI to 0.119.0
- Added Pydantic email dependency
- Implemented email verification endpoints
- Added email sending service and templates
- Created tests for email verification
- Refactored user repository interface
- General code cleanup

README.md, after:

<h1 align="center">﷽</h1>

# Nmaa – Full-Stack Social Media App

A full-stack Instagram-like application built using **FastAPI**, **MongoDB**, and **Next.js**
Designed with modularity, clarity, and scalability.

This project is currently in the early stages of development.

---

## Table of Contents

- [Features](#features)
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  - [Auth Server](#auth-server)
  - [Resource Server](#resource-server)
  - [Gateway Server](#gateway-server)
  - [Frontend](#frontend)
- [Contributors & Tools](#contributors--tools)
- [Author](#author)

---

## Features

- **Microservices Architecture** – Modular Auth and Resource servers
- **JWT Auth & Refresh Tokens** – Secure authentication and session management
- **Async FastAPI** – Non-blocking I/O and dependency injection
- **Redis Caching** – In-memory performance optimization
- **MongoDB (Motor)** – Async NoSQL document database
- **Next.js (TypeScript)** – Modern frontend with Tailwind, Redux Toolkit, and Shadcn UI
- **Docker Support** – Ready for containerized deployment

---

## Tech Stack

| Layer          | Tech                                                            |
| -------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Backend        | FastAPI, Motor, Redis, Pydantic, bcrypt                         |
| Frontend       | Next.js, TypeScript, TailwindCSS, Redux Toolkit, Shadcn, lucide |
| Infrastructure | Docker, Caddy (reverse proxy), MongoDB                          |
| Testing & Dev  | pytest, VS Code Tasks                                           |

---

## Getting Started

This project has a multi-server architecture, each server has its own folder (auth-server, resource-server and frontend)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/hellmakima/instagram.git
```

### Auth Server

The auth server is responsible for user authentication, password management, and user management
It uses JWT for authentication and refresh tokens for session management

**MongoDB**
Database: instagram_auth

```bash
cd instagram/auth-server
uv sync --frozen
uv run uvicorn app.main:app --reload --port 5001
```

### Resource Server

The resource server is responsible for handling all the media files and their metadata

**MongoDB**
Database: instagram_resource

```bash
cd instagram/resource-server
uv sync --frozen
uv run uvicorn app.main:app --reload --port 5002
```

### Gateway Server

This is reverse proxy for handling all the requests from the frontend and redirecting them to the appropriate server

This is just a temporary solution to redirect requests. This will be replaced by `nginx`

You can skip this and configure `instagram/frontend/.env` to proxy requests to the appropriate server along with CORS headers in main.py of respective server

1. Download [caddyserver](https://caddyserver.com/download)
2. copy `instagram/utils/caddy.json` to the same folder
3. run `caddy_windows_amd64.exe run`
4. in a new terminal, run `caddy_windows_amd64.exe  reload --config caddy.json`

You'll also need to set up `hosts` file in `C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc` with the following content:

```
127.0.0.1 nmaa.com
127.0.0.1 auth.nmaa.com
127.0.0.1 resource.nmaa.com
```

### Frontend

The frontend is a Next.js application

```bash
cd instagram/frontend
npm i
npm run dev
```

You're all set!
visit `nmaa.com` in your favorite browser

### Tests

There are tests in each server in `test` folder. You can run them by running `uv run pytest` in the respective server folder.

---

## Author

Developed by [@hellmakima](https://github.com/hellmakima)

---

Pull requests, suggestions, and collaborations are welcome
